Article/mobile cicd (#190)
rootstrap/blog: content/iOS App Build and Release Automation - Sebastian Lopez.md

> # **How to Automate iOS App Builds Using Fastlane & GitHub**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# **How to Automate iOS App Builds Using Fastlane & GitHub**
```

> # **How to automate your iOS app builds with Fastlane and GitHub Actions**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# **How to Automate iOS App Builds Using Fastlane & GitHub**
```

![cover photo](images/apps_touch.jpg)

*This is part 1 of a two-part post on mobile app automation. Next chapter will focus on Android build automation.*

> Mobile app development is one of our core competencies here at Rootstrap, and we embrace best practices for development and delivery just as much as we do for backend and web applications. As Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery requires maintaining multiple backend environments (Development, QA, Staging, Production), with fully automated deployments to each, it also requires maintaining multiple versions of our mobile apps, to match each environment. Building and releasing all these versions is a time-consuming and error prone process, which can -and should- be automated, though it presents a particular set of challenges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mobile app development is one of our core competencies here at Rootstrap, and we embrace best practices for development and delivery just as much as we do for backend and web applications. As Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery requires maintaining multiple backend environments (Development, QA, Staging, Production), with fully automated deployments to each, it also requires maintaining multiple versions of our mobile apps, to match each environment. Building and releasing all these versions is a time-consuming and error prone process, which can -and should- be automated, though it presents a particular set of challenges.
```

> Mobile app development is one of our core competencies here at Rootstrap, and we embrace best practices for development and delivery just as much as we do for backend and web applications. As Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery requires maintaining multiple backend environments (Development, QA, Staging, Production), with fully automated deployments to each, it also requires maintaining multiple versions of our mobile apps, to match each environment. Building and releasing all these versions is a time-consuming and error prone process, which can -and should- be automated, though it presents a particular set of challenges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here at Rootstrap, mobile app development is one of our core competencies and we embrace best practices for development and delivery, just as we do for backend and web applications. As Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery requires maintaining multiple backend environments (Development, QA, Staging, Production) with fully automated deployments, it also requires maintaining multiple versions of mobile apps to match each environment. Building and releasing all these versions is a time-consuming and error-prone process which ideally should be automated, even though it does present a particular set of challenges in doing so.
```

> In this post I am going to describe the approach we implemented for iOS CI/CD making use of Fastlane, a CI system (GitHub Actions), and some spare Mac Minis which were sitting idle at the office and got turned into build servers. We'll use AWS S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we could safely store encrypted files could serve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, I am going to describe the approach we implemented for iOS CI/CD making use of Fastlane, a CI system (GitHub Actions), and how we also turned idle Mac Minis into build servers. We'll use AWS S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we can safely store encrypted files would work.
```

> For this example we will use an iOS app developed with React Native, but the same approach works iOS native apps. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, we will use an iOS app developed with React Native, but the same approach works with iOS native apps. 
```

> For this example we will use an iOS app developed with React Native, but the same approach works iOS native apps. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, we will use an iOS app developed with **React Native**, but the same approach works iOS native apps. 
```

## Why Fastlane

<img src="images/fastlane.png" alt="Signing" height="50" align="middle"/>

> [Fastlane](https://docs.fastlane.tools/) touts itself as the easiest way to automate deployments for mobile apps. It offers integrations with other CLI tools and APIs including Xcode, Android SDK, Gradle, iTunes App Store, Google Play Store, Git, AWS S3, etc. We adopted it because we found it to be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Fastlane](https://docs.fastlane.tools/) prides itself on being the easiest tool to automate deployments for mobile apps. It offers integrations with other CLI tools and APIs including Xcode, Android SDK, Gradle, iTunes App Store, Google Play Store, Git, AWS S3, etc. We adopted Fastlane as it has the following advantages: 
```

> * Easy to set up (just install a Ruby gem)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Easy to set up _(just install a Ruby gem)_
```

> * Flexible, with an easy to read syntax (most commands have self-descriptive aliases)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Flexible - w/ an easy to read syntax _(most commands have self-descriptive aliases)_
```_

* Open Source and free to use

> * Widely adopted and well maintained (acquired by Google in 2017)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Widely adopted and well maintained _(acquired by Google in 2017)_
```

> * Easy to integrate with CI systems (though 2FA presents challenges, as we'll see)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Easy to integrate with CI systems _(albeit w/ 2FA challenges, as we'll discuss later)_
```

## Why GitHub Actions

> GitHub offers [Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) as a complete CI/CD system that seamlessly integrates with repositories hosted there. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GitHub provides [Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) as a complete **CI/CD** system that seamlessly integrates with repositories hosted on its platform.
```

> Our experience showed it to be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some advantages of using this tool: 
```

# **Automating iOS App Builds with Fastlane and GitHub Actions**

![cover photo](images/apps_touch.jpg)

*This is part 1 of a two-part post on mobile app automation. Next chapter will focus on Android build automation*

Mobile app development is one of our core competencies here at Rootstrap, and we embrace best practices for development and delivery just as much as for backend and web applications. Just as Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery requires maintaining multiple backend environments (Development, QA, Staging, Production), with fully automated deployments to each, it also requires maintaining multiple versions of our mobile apps, to match each environment. Building and releasing all these versions is a time consuming and error prone process, which can -and should- be automated, though it presents a particular set of challenges.

> In this post I am going to describe the approach we implemented for iOS CI/CD making use of Fastlane, a CI system (GitHub Actions), and some spare MacMinis which were sitting idle in the office and got turned into build servers. I'll use AWS S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we could safely store encrypted files could serve.

Author: > I see that you are using we and I indistinctively, I'd try to stick with just one unless the occasion requires it.

Left only the first 'I' (I am writing the article), then it is 'we' going forward (about what _we_ implemented). Not fully convinced either way yet tho  X)

For this example we will use an iOS app developed with React Native, but the same approach works iOS native apps. 

## Why Fastlane

<img src="images/fastlane.png" alt="Signing" height="50" align="middle"/>

> [Fastlane](https://docs.fastlane.tools/) touts itself as the easiest way to automate deployments for mobile apps. It offers integrations with other CLI tools and APIs including Xcode, Android SDK, Gradle, iTunes App Store, Google Play Store, Git, AWS S3, etc. We adopted it because we found it to be:

Author: yep, though it has somewhat of an exaggerated/self-promoted connotation

  * Otherwise repo owners need to repeat the process of adding it individually for each repo (the same actual machine can still be reused for multiple projects).

Fortunately there is no need to do any project-specific setup beyond this, as we can let GHA handle the build requirements (all official and third-party Actions are available to self-hosted runners). We also do not need to give the machine a public IP address, as the agent installed during the setup will poll GH for kicking off the workflows and reporting back.

Upon setting up the runner, we can associate our workflows with it just by specifying its label in the `on:` section.

<img src="images/actions_runner_status.png" alt="Signing" height="100" align="middle"/>

Some important configuration items:
* [Set the Mac to never enter sleep mode ](https://support.apple.com/guide/mac-help/set-sleep-and-wake-times-mchle41a6ccd/mac)
* [Configure the runner application as a service](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/hosting-your-own-runners/configuring-the-self-hosted-runner-application-as-a-service) so it automatically starts upon a machine restart

## Summary

> We have gone through an example of Fastlane as a powerful free tool for automating our mobile app build and release processes, and GitHub Actions as a good CICD system that can integrate with Fastlane to trigger our pipelines automatically and in a secure environment. We have also seen an easy way for turning our spare Macs into build servers. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have gone through an example of how to automate our mobile app deployment using Fastlane a powerful free tool for automating the build and release processes. Connecting that to GitHub Actions as a good CI/CD system that can integrate with Fastlane to trigger our pipelines automatically and in a secure environment. We have also seen an easy way of turning our spare Macs into build servers. 
```

# **Automating iOS App Builds with Fastlane and GitHub Actions**

![cover photo](images/apps_touch.jpg)

*This is part 1 of a two-part post on mobile app automation. Next chapter will focus on Android build automation*

> Mobile app development is one of our core competencies here at Rootstrap, and we embrace best practices for development and delivery just as much as for backend and web applications. As Continuous Integration/Continuos Delivery requires maintaining multiple backend environments (Development, QA, Staging, Production), with fully automated deployments to each, it also requires maintaining multiple versions of our mobile apps, to match each environment. Building and releasing all these versions is a time consuming and error prone process, which should -and can be automated, even though it presents a particular set of challenges.

Reviewer 3: "u" missing in `Continuos Delivery`

In this post I am going to describe the approach we implemented for iOS CI/CD making use of Fastlane, a CI system (GitHub Actions), and some spare MacMinis which were sitting idle in the office and got turned into build servers. I will also use AWS S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we could safely store encrypted files could serve.

For this example we will use an iOS app developed with React Native, but the same approach works when developing natively for iOS -and as we will see in the follow-up article, it can also be translated to Android apps.
Using local machines is not absolutely required, but it is useful for iOS.

## Why Fastlane

<img src="images/fastlane.png" alt="Signing" height="50" align="middle"/>

> [Fastlane](https://docs.fastlane.tools/) touts itself as the easiest way to automate deployments for mobile apps. If offers integrations with other CLI tools and APIs including Xcode, Android SDK, Gradle, iTunes App Store, Google Play Store, Git, AWS S3, etc. We adopted it because we found it to be:

Reviewer 3: `If offers`. I think it is an "It"

* Easy to setup (just install a Ruby gem)
* Flexible, with an easy to read syntax (most commands have self-descriptive alias)
* Open Source and free to use
* Widely adopted and well maintained (accquired by Google in 2017)

> * Easy to integrate with CI systems (though 2FA authentication presents challenges as we'll see)

Reviewer 3: I think the word `authentication` here is redundant.

  * Otherwise repo owners need to repeat the process of adding it individually for each repo (the same actual machine can still be reused for multiple projects).

Fortunately there is no need to do any project-specific setup beyond this, as we can let GHA handle the build requirements (official and third-party Actions are available to self-hosted runners). We also do not need to give the machine a public IP address, as the agent installed during the setup will poll GH for kicking off the workflows and reporting back.

Upon setting up the runner, we can associate our workflows with it just by specifying its label in the `on:` section.

<img src="images/actions_runner_status.png" alt="Signing" height="100" align="middle"/>

Some important configuration items:
* [Set the Mac to never enter sleep mode ](https://support.apple.com/guide/mac-help/set-sleep-and-wake-times-mchle41a6ccd/mac)
* [Configure the runner application as a service](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/hosting-your-own-runners/configuring-the-self-hosted-runner-application-as-a-service) so it automatically starts upon a machine restart

## Summary

> We have gone through an example of Fastlane as a powerful free tool for automating our mobile app build and release processes, and GitHub Actions as a good CICD system that can integrate with Fastlane to trigger our pipelines automatically and in a secure environment. We have also see an easy way for turning our spare Macs into build servers. 

Reviewer 3: "n" missing in `We have also see`
